IPN Progress Report 42-158

August 15, 2004

Measurements and Calibration of Tropospheric Delay
at Goldstone from the Cassini Media
Calibration System
S. J. Keihm,1 A. Tanner,1 and H. Rosenberger2

One and one-half years of near-continuous measurements of the troposphereinduced path delay at Goldstone have been analyzed in order to (1) characterize the
troposphere-delay ﬂuctuations in a statistical sense and (2) evaluate the path-delay
calibration performance of the Media Calibration System (MCS) at DSS 25. Both
the wet and dry components of delay are considered. Statistics based on 5-minuteinterval MCS data indicate wet-delay temporal structure function (the expectation
value of delay diﬀerences versus the time interval) values of 1 mm at 5 minutes,
5 mm at 1 hour, and 2 cm at 1 day, increasing to an asymptotic level of 3 to
4 cm for time scales greater than 2 days. At time scales of 1000 to 10,000 seconds,
Allan standard deviation (ASD) computations of the wet-delay variations indicate
slightly higher ﬂuctuation levels than shown in a previous study. The diﬀerences
are attributable to the inclusion of cloudy conditions in the present study. The
dry-delay ﬂuctuation levels are approximately one-third the wet-delay levels at all
time scales from minutes to weeks.
The ability of the MCS to accurately calibrate the delay ﬂuctuations was assessed
by comparing side-by-side results from the two redundant instrumentation sets that
comprise the MCS. Based on data during the ﬁrst three Cassini radio science experiments, the MCS surpasses the requirement of the Cassini Gravitational Wave
Experiment (residual ASD < 1.1 × 10−15 s/s) at all time scales >1000 seconds. For
time scales extending out to weeks, the MCS has demonstrated a precision better
than 0.06 cm for monitoring zenith-equivalent delay variations during spacecrafttracking operations.

1 Microwave Experiment Systems and Technology Section.
2 Interferometry Systems and Large Optical Systems Section.

The research described in this publication was carried out by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

1

I. Introduction
Precision spacecraft radio science and radio astronomy experiments have been used in many geophysical, planetary, and astronomical investigations. The time scales of interest vary widely depending on the
phenomena being studied, e.g., [1–4]. In particular, some planetary occultations, planetary and satellite
gravity-determination ﬂybys, and relativity experiments have observations where the duration of the signal is >104 seconds [5,6]. To analyze the data and evaluate the ultimate sensitivity of these observations
requires an understanding of the statistics of the competing noises on these time scales. Instrumental
noises often can be made extraordinarily small, leaving propagation noise—e.g., phase scintillation in the
Earth’s troposphere—as an important remaining noise source for experiments having time scales from 102
to 106 seconds and longer. Utilizing data from the newly deployed Media Calibration System (MCS), this
article addresses the statistics of wet and dry tropospheric phase scintillation at Goldstone, California,
on time scales of minutes to multiple days, and evaluates the MCS performance in measuring variations
in the line-of-sight ﬂuctuations during the ﬁrst three Cassini radio science experiments.
During the summer of 2001, the MCS was deployed at Goldstone’s DSS 25 for the primary purpose
of providing state-of-the-art measurements of the wet troposphere path delay in support of the 2001
to 2004 Cassini radio science experiments. The primary instruments of the redundant MCS are two
Advanced Water Vapor Radiometers (AWVRs) deployed 35 m apart at DSS 25 (Fig. 1). The AWVRs
measure sky brightness temperatures at three frequencies near the 22-GHz water vapor line and were
designed at JPL to provide order-of-magnitude improvement in stability and precision relative to standard
WVRs [7]. Their operating characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The MCS also includes two
Microwave Temperature Proﬁle (MTP) radiometers operating in the 50- to 60-GHz oxygen band and two
surface meteorology packages consisting of temperature, pressure, humidity, and wind-speed sensors. The
data sets are processed as redundant systems, designated system 1 and system 2, each consisting of the
combined measurements from one of the two AWVRs, MTPs, and surface meteorology sensors. Details
describing the basis for instrument selection and retrieval algorithm development can be found in [8].
Since September 1, 2001, the MCS has provided a near-continuous archive of radiometer and surface
meteorology data. During the Cassini radio science experiments, the AWVRs track the Cassini spacecraft

Fig. 1. One of the two Advanced Water Vapor Radiometers at DSS 25.

2

Table 1. Characteristics of the Advanced Water Vapor Radiometer.

Characteristic

Value

Operating frequencies

22.2, 23.8, 31.4 GHz

Bandwidths

500 MHz (all channels)

Beam sizes (half-power beam width)

1.0 deg (22.2- and 23.8-GHz channels);
1.2 deg (31.4-GHz channel)

Elevation-pointing accuracy

±0.1 deg absolute (all sky)

Elevation-pointing precision

±0.01-deg stability over 1000 s

in order to provide the DSS-25 Doppler tracking data analysis with line-of-sight calibration of the tropospheric wet delay at time scales of seconds to hours. During the remaining 80 percent of the time, the
AWVRs operate in a “tipping curve” mode in which a spiraling sequence of elevation/azimuth directions
are sampled, with observations within one degree of zenith occurring approximately every 5 minutes. For
purposes unrelated to Cassini radio science support, AWVR zenith brightness temperatures (TBs) at 5minute intervals have been routinely extracted from the AWVR data archives, providing near-continuous
TB time series since September 2001. When operating in the Cassini tracking mode, zenith brightness
temperatures were obtained by a simple air-mass conversion dependent on the 5-minute-interval elevation
position of the AWVRs.
The tropospheric-delay statistics presented in this article are derived from the MCS data archive of
September 2001 to March 2003. Most of the wet-delay statistics are computed from the 5-minute-interval
zenith TBs provided by the AWVRs. The dry-delay statistics are computed primarily from an archive of
5-minute-interval surface pressure measurements using a single sensor. The 19-month interval includes
three Cassini radio science experiments: the Gravitational Wave Experiments (GWEI and GWEII ) from
November 26, 2001, to January 4, 2002, and from December 6, 2002, to January 14, 2003; and the
Solar Conjunction Experiment (SCEI ) from June 6, 2002, to July 5, 2002. During these experiments,
comparisons of the redundant instrument measurements provide an estimate of the MCS performance
for calibrating both wet and dry tropospheric delay variations over time scales of 30 seconds to multiple
days.
In Section II of this article, the path-delay statistics of the 19-month archive are assessed using a
variety of measures, including temporal structure functions, Allan standard deviation (ASD) [9], and
spectral analysis. In Section III, comparisons are made between the 19-month archive and the statistics
derived from each of the Cassini radio science experiments. MCS performance also is evaluated, using
comparisons between the redundant components of the system. In Section IV, results are summarized
with recommendations for future work.

II. Nineteen-Month Path-Delay Statistics
A. Wet- and Dry-Delay Time Series
The MCS data utilized to compute zenith path-delay time series over the September 2001 to March
2003 interval were the three-channel AWVR brightness temperatures (for the wet component) and surface
pressure (for the dry component). The wet-delay algorithm consisted of an all-weather statistical retrieval
based on radiosonde-derived linear correlations between the wet-delay and AWVR zenith brightness
temperatures:
P Dwet = −0.849 − 0.1364 ∗ T B22.2 + 0.6899 ∗ T B23.8 − 0.3062 ∗ T B31.4
3

(1)

with P Dwet deﬁned as the zenith delay in centimeters due to water vapor, and the three-channel AWVR
brightness temperatures (TBs) are in kelvins. A 1980 to 1988 radiosonde data archive from Desert
Rock, Nevada, was used to generate the Eq. (1) coeﬃcients by regression. Desert Rock was chosen
for its elevation and climatological similarity to Goldstone. This algorithm is not as precise as the more
sophisticated algorithms used during Cassini radio science experiments, but is completely adequate for the
purpose of generating path-delay statistics. The zenith dry-delay algorithm is based on the assumption
of hydrostatic equilibrium [10] and is speciﬁc to the latitude and elevation of DSS 25 at Goldstone:
P Ddry = 0.22789 ∗ Ps

(2)

with P Ddry deﬁned as the zenith dry delay in centimeters, and Ps is the measured surface pressure in
millibars.
The 19-month P Dwet archive was derived primarily from the system-1 AWVR data, with system-2
data used to ﬁll in gaps when the system-1 AWVR was oﬀ line. The completeness of the combined data set
was such that only four gaps greater than 2 hours remained in the P Dwet time series. Linear interpolation
was used to complete the ﬁnal 5-minute-interval archive. For the P Ddry archive, the uninterrupted 5minute January 2002 to March 2003 interval Ps data from a single surface meteorology package were
used in the Eq. (2) conversion. A total of three surface meteorology packages were employed during the
19-month interval. The single longest consecutive running Ps measurement was used to generate the
P Ddry statistics in order to avoid intercalibration issues.
Figures 2 and 3 show the ﬁnal time series of DSS-25 zenith wet and dry delays obtained from the MCS
data using Eqs. (1) and (2). Note that the variability of the much larger dry-delay component is only
∼1/3 that of the wet delay. This result is consistent in all considered metrics of the wet- and dry-delay
variations. An annual variation is seen in both the wet- and dry-delay time series, but this component has
little impact on the time scales of interest to radio science experiments. Figures 4 (wet) and 5 (dry) show
compressed versions of the time series over 10-day intervals of summer and winter, illustrating shorter
time scale eﬀects. A diurnal component is seen, most clearly in the dry-delay time series, and most
persistently during summer months. The summertime dry-delay component also shows a semi-diurnal
feature. The dry-delay diurnal variations are most likely related to daily wind-speed patterns.
B. Path-Delay Temporal Structure Functions
From the 19- and 15-month data sets of wet- and dry-delay time series, the expected levels of pathdelay ﬂuctuations can be computed for all time scales important for radio science experiments. We deﬁne
the temporal structure function (TSF) for zenith path delay as

T SF (∆t) =


2 1/2
P D(t + ∆t) − P D(t)

(3)

where the < > brackets denote an expectation value for sampling time ∆t.
Application of Eq. (3) to the time series shown in Figs. 2 and 3 yields the wet and dry temporal
structure functions shown in Fig. 6. The expected variations increase rapidly with the time interval out
to approximately 50 hours, beyond which the variability remains nearly constant, with the wet component
three times more variable than the dry. Month-to-month ﬂuctuations in the 12- to 96-hour time scale
wet-delay structure functions are shown in Fig. 7, illustrating the TSF variability at Goldstone. Note
that, at time scales <24 hours, the seasonal variations in the wet TSF appear to be small.
4

Fig. 2. Nineteen-month time series of zenith wet-delay measurements
at DSS 25 from AWVR data.

Fig. 3. Fifteen-month time series of zenith dry-delay measurements
at DSS 25 from surface pressure data.

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Compressed-scale time series of DSS-25 zenith wet delay
over 10-day (a) summer and (b) winter intervals.

C. Allan Standard Deviation Statistics
At time scales relevant to sidereal tracking, the Allan standard deviation (ASD) of delay is frequently
used as a measure of the non-linear ﬂuctuation levels of the tropospheric delay:

2 1/2
τ (t) − 2τ (t + ∆t) + τ (t + 2∆t)
√

ASD(∆t) =
2 · ∆t

(4)

where τ (t) is the delay in seconds at time t and ∆t is a time interval increment. Equation (4) deﬁnes a
statistical quantity which is proportional to the second-order variability of the delay over time interval
∆t. The time delay τ is obtained from the P D measurements simply by dividing by the speed of light.
As an example, the MCS performance requirement for the Cassini Gravitational Wave Experiment [11]
is that the ASD of the residual troposphere-induced delay (after calibration) be less than 1.1 × 10−15 s/s
over time intervals of 1000 to 10,000 seconds. As an indicator of MCS performance requirements, the
uncalibrated ASD spectra, computed from the 19- and 15-month time series of wet and dry zenith delays
at DSS 25, are shown in Fig. 8 over time intervals from 5 minutes to 10 hours. The dry-delay ASD
spectrum reveals that expected ﬂuctuation levels fall below (meet) the GWE requirement at the 1000- to
10,000-s time scales. However, the ASD of the tropospheric wet delay can be expected to exceed (fail)
the GWE requirement by a factor of three to seven at zenith, increasing rapidly at lower elevation angles
in proportion to air mass. Comparison of the expected levels of tropospheric-delay ﬂuctuations with the
GWE requirements indicates that the MCS system must remove (calibrate) approximately 90 percent or
more of the wet-delay ASD near 1000-s time scales.
6

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. Compressed-scale time series of DSS-25 zenith dry delay over
10-day (a) summer and (b) winter intervals.

Fig. 6. Wet- (and dry)-delay temporal structure functions as measured
at DSS 25 over 19- (and 14)-month intervals.

7

∆t = 12 h

∆t = 24 h

∆t = 48 h

∆t = 96 h

Fig. 7. Monthly variation of wet-delay temporal structure function at
selected time intervals.

Fig. 8. Wet- (and dry)-delay Allan standard deviation as measured at
DSS 25 over 19- (and 14)-month intervals.

8

Figure 9 shows the month-to-month variations in the wet-delay ASD statistic, featuring some seasonal
dependence, most evident at the 1000-s time scale. Comparison of these results with an earlier study
[12] reveals 20 to 50 percent higher ASD levels than measured during the October 1993 to September
1994 interval at DSS 13. The diﬀerence is primarily due to the inclusion of cloudy conditions in the more
recent archive. The analysis of the 1993 to 1994 data included only 24-hour intervals of cloud-free data.
Day/night stratiﬁcation of the complete September 2001 to March 2003 data set has not been examined.
However, separate analysis (Section III) of the 30- to 40-day intervals of the SCE (summer day) and
GWE (winter night) MCS data reveal seasonal as well as day/night contrasts.
D. Spectral Analysis
Figures 10 and 11 show the two-sided wet- and dry-delay power spectra computed from the time series
shown in Figs. 2 and 3. In the spectral analysis, the data were pre-whitened with a ﬁrst-diﬀerence ﬁlter
(which has zero response at DC, giving zero mean) and post-darkened after Fourier transforming. The
wet spectrum is roughly power law at high frequencies, less steep than for the Kolmogorov value (blue
line, ∼f −2.67 ), and shows no signiﬁcant diurnal or higher-frequency harmonics. As seen in the temporal
structure function analysis, the spectral level of the dry delay is below that of the wet. However, the
dry spectrum does contain a clear diurnal component plus higher harmonics, as suggested previously in
the compressed (10-day) plots of the dry delay (Fig. 5). The diurnal-scale dry-delay (surface pressure)
harmonics may be caused by repeating daily wind patterns at Goldstone.

III. MCS Statistics and Performance During Cassini Radio Science Experiments
During the Cassini gravitational wave and solar conjunction radio science experiments, the AWVRs
of the MCS track the Cassini spacecraft in order to provide the best possible corrections of the line-ofsight delay ﬂuctuations for the DSS-25 Doppler delay measurements. After ﬁnal processing, the MCS
data product consists of 24- to 30-second-interval time series of zenith-equivalent wet delay and surfacepressure-derived dry delay. The daily time series typically are 10 to 12 hours in duration (the Cassini

∆t = 1000 s

∆t = 3000 s

∆t = 10,000 s

Fig. 9. Monthly variation of wet-delay Allan standard deviation at
selected time intervals.

9

log10 (spectral density of zenith wet delay, cm2 Hz−1)

AMC at DSS 25, approx. 1.5 years starting 9/1/2001
Pre-whitened/Post-darkened
Red line = Smoothed spectrum

6

4

2

0

−2

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

log10 (frequency, Hz)
Fig. 10. Spectral density of zenith wet delay from 19-month
DSS-25 measurements.

Dry tropo at DSS 25, approx. 1.5 years starting 9/1/2001

log10 (spectral density of zenith wet delay, cm2 Hz−1)

6

Pre-whitened/Post-darkened
Red line = Smoothed spectrum

4

2

0

−2

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

log10 (frequency, Hz)
Fig. 11. Spectral density of zenith dry delay from 14-month
DSS-25 measurements.

10

−2

track), over nighttime hours for the 40 consecutive winter tracks of the GWEs and over daytime hours
during the 30 consecutive summer tracks of the SCE. Note that the wet-delay algorithms employed during the Cassini radio science experiments are much more complex than the simple AWVR brightness
temperature conversion used for the 19-month archive. The addition of MTP and surface meteorology
observables is intended to maximize the precision of the path-delay-ﬂuctuation measurements [8]. However, the use of oﬀ-nadir AWVR measurements and a more precise algorithm will have no signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the zenith path-delay-ﬂuctuation statistics that derive from the MCS data.
Because the Goldstone MCS consists of two identical sets of instruments, comparisons of the two systems’ path-delay measurements during Cassini tracking provide an estimate of the precision and stability
of the MCS. Primary error sources, including instrument calibration stability, AWVR elevation-pointing
uncertainties, and sampled air-mass separation, are expected to be uncorrelated between the redundant
systems so that the diﬀerences in the path-delay measurements provide a lower-bound error estimate
for the system. Potential correlated errors, such as the absorption-model uncertainties in the wet pathdelay retrieval algorithm, may be a factor for the absolute accuracy of the measurements, but are not
expected to be signiﬁcant for issues of precision in the measurements of the path-delay variations. The
most important test of the MCS performance will result from a comparison of the MCS-derived delay
ﬂuctuations with the residual phase ﬂuctuations (data not yet available) derived from the GWE and SCE
Doppler tracking measurements. However, such comparisons also will require a quantitative evaluation
of the uncertainties in the Doppler-derived phase variations before an assessment of the MCS accuracy
can be made.
A. Temporal Structure Function Statistics and MCS Calibration Performance
Figures 12 and 13 show the wet and dry path-delay temporal structure function spectra computed for
the ﬁrst SCE (SCEI ) and the ﬁrst and second GWEs (GWEI and GWEII ). The solid lines indicate the
uncalibrated spectra as measured by system 1. The dashed lines indicate the diﬀerence spectra (system 2
minus system 1), our estimate of tropospheric calibration performance by the MCS. (Note that in Figs. 12
and 13 and later in Figs. 15 and 16 the dashed spectra referred to as “calibrated” actually represent the
residual variations of the system-diﬀerenced measurements. As discussed above, these diﬀerence spectra
represent our current best estimate of the uncertainties in the MCS calibration of the tropospheric-delay
ﬂuctuations.) Because the Cassini radio science experiments are discontinuous (sidereal tracking of the
spacecraft) over 30 to 40 consecutive days, the expectation spectra shown in Figs. 12 and 13 required
some modiﬁcations beyond the calculation of Eq. (3). For time intervals less than 10 hours, Eq. (3) was
applied to each day’s MCS tracking data, and the daily results were averaged over the 30- to 40-day
duration of the experiment. For time scales of 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 days, Eq. (3) was applied to paired days
of the MCS tracking data, and the results were averaged over the lifetime of each experiment.
Note ﬁrst that for all three Cassini radio science experiments the measured uncalibrated wet- and
dry-delay ﬂuctuations shown in Figs. 12 and 13 are consistent with the statistics from the 19-month data
set shown in Fig. 6. Small diﬀerences seen in the wet structure function statistics are consistent with a
model [12] of higher ﬂuctuation levels during summer daytime (SCEI ) relative to winter nighttime (GWEI
and GWEII ).
The most noteworthy aspects of the results shown in Figs. 12 and 13 are the dashed spectra of systemdiﬀerenced ﬂuctuation measurements obtained during Cassini spacecraft tracking. These spectra reﬂect
the MCS performance for measuring changes in the tropospheric delay over time scales of 30 seconds to
16 days. For the zenith wet delay (Fig. 12), the MCS provides better than 0.06-cm calibration precision
over all computed time intervals (up to 16 days). The wet-delay calibration performance is largely
independent of the magnitude of the uncalibrated path-delay variations.
The dry ﬂuctuation component (Fig. 13) is removable to a precision better than 0.01 cm for all time
scales up to 16 days. The variability of the dry-delay performance is driven primarily by wind conditions.

11

Fig. 12. Wet path-delay fluctuation spectra at DSS 25 during three Cassini radio
science experiments. Solid curves indicate temporal structure function statistics
of the wet troposphere before MCS calibration. Dashed curves indicate residual
structure function statistics of the redundant system-differenced wet-delay
measurements.

Fig. 13. Dry path-delay fluctuation spectra at DSS 25 during three Cassini radio
science experiments. Solid curves indicate temporal structure function statistics
of the dry troposphere before MCS calibration. Dashed curves indicate residual
structure function statistics of the redundant system-differenced dry-delay
measurements.

12

For surface wind speeds greater than 16.09 km/h (10 miles/h), small high-frequency ﬂuctuations occur
in the surface pressure measurements, which convert to a higher “noise” level in the system-diﬀerenced
dry-delay component. A typical example of the correlation between the surface pressure ﬂuctuation
level and measured wind speed is shown in Fig. 14. Measurements are shown from both system-1 and
system-2 surface meteorology packages during an SCE Cassini track in 2002. Note that the “worst”
dry-delay calibration performance occurred for the daytime/summer SCE when higher wind conditions
were most common.
B. Allan Standard Deviation Statistics and MCS Calibration Performance
Figures 15 and 16 show the wet and dry ASD spectra computed for the three Cassini radio science
experiments to date. As shown previously for the temporal structure function spectra, the solid lines
indicate the uncalibrated spectra as measured by system 1. The dashed lines indicate the diﬀerence
spectra (system 2 minus system 1), our estimate of tropospheric calibration performance by the MCS.
The computed time intervals extend from 30 to 10,000 seconds, covering the time scales of primary
interest for the Cassini GWE. The computed values shown are actually 30- to 40-day averages of the
values computed for each Cassini track.
Note ﬁrst that the uncalibrated ASD spectra derived from MCS Cassini tracking are consistent with
the 19-month spectra derived from AWVR zenith TB measurements shown in Fig. 8. Factor-of-two variations due to seasonal or day/night eﬀects are not unexpected. For example, note the diﬀerence between
the wet-delay ASD levels of the summer/daytime (SCEI ) and winter/nighttime (GWEI and GWEII ) MCS
data (solid curves of Fig. 15). In contrast, the calibrated wet ASD spectra, estimated by the system-2

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14. Measurements of (a) wind speed and (b) surface pressure provided by the redundant MCS instruments during the June 20, 2002, Cassini tracking experiment. System-1
data in black; system-2 data in red. Note the correlation of higher wind speeds, >16.09
km/h (>10 miles/h), with increased levels of pressure measurement fluctuations.

13

Fig. 15. Wet path-delay Allan standard deviation spectra at DSS 25 during three
Cassini radio science experiments. Solid curves indicate ASD statistics of the
wet troposphere before MCS calibration. Dashed curves indicate residual ASD
statistics of the redundant system-differenced wet-delay measurements.

Fig. 16. Dry path-delay Allan standard deviation spectra at DSS 25 during three
Cassini radio science experiments. Solid curves indicate ASD statistics of the
dry troposphere before MCS calibration. Dashed curves indicate residual ASD
statistics of the redundant system-differenced dry-delay measurements.

14

minus system-1 measured path-delay diﬀerences (dashed lines of Fig. 15), are nearly identical, indicating
MCS performance that is insensitive to the actual ﬂuctuation level in the troposphere. The calibrated
(system-diﬀerenced) dashed spectra of Fig. 15 are to be compared with the GWE requirement that the
residual (post-calibration) ASD for 1000- to 10,000-s time scales be less than 1.1 × 10−15 s/s. The results
shown in Fig. 15 indicate that the MCS has surpassed that requirement.
The ASD spectra due to uncalibrated dry-delay ﬂuctuations are generally 5 to 10 times smaller than
the wet component (solid lines, Fig. 16), below the level of the GWE requirement for 1000- to 10000-s
time scales. After calibration, as estimated by the system-diﬀerenced ASD (dashed lines), the residual
dry ﬂuctuation levels are approximately 1 to 2 orders of magnitude below the GWE requirement.

IV. Summary
Statistical properties of both wet and dry path-delay ﬂuctuations at Goldstone have been measured
over the September 2001 to March 2003 interval using instrumentation of the Media Calibration System
deployed at DSS 25 in the summer of 2001. Variations have been characterized using path-delay structure
functions and Allan standard deviation in the time domain and Fourier spectra in the frequency domain.
For the period examined, the wet-delay ﬂuctuation levels are 20 to 50 percent higher than computed
from an earlier one-year data set, a result attributable to the exclusion of cloudy conditions in the earlier
archive.
Measured dry-delay ﬂuctuation levels are approximately one-third those of the wet component at hour
and longer time scales. In the frequency domain, the dry-delay power spectrum contains signiﬁcant diurnal
harmonics, indicative of the eﬀects of repeating daily wind patterns on the surface pressure measurements.
Fluctuation statistics obtained during periods of the Cassini spacecraft sidereal tracking are consistent
with the results obtained using the complete 19-month archive. Factor-of-two variations are seen in
the summer/daytime versus winter/nighttime wet-delay statistics, consistent with previous analysis of
an earlier Goldstone WVR data archive. At a 1000-second time scale, the uncalibrated zenith wetdelay ﬂuctuations are seen to be typically a factor of ﬁfteen higher than the GWE speciﬁcation. At
10,000 seconds, the naturally occurring wet troposphere ASD exceeds the GWE speciﬁcation by a factor
of two at zenith, scaling to a factor of six at 20-degree elevation. The naturally occurring dry-delay
ﬂuctuations (in the ASD domain) are typically below the Cassini GWE requirement for all time scales
from 1000 to 10,000 seconds.
Comparisons of the path-delay measurements provided by the redundant systems of the MCS provide
an estimate of the system’s precision for calibrating line-of-sight tropospheric-delay variations during the
Cassini radio science experiments. System-diﬀerenced path-delay measurements reﬂect error components
due to limitations of instrument calibration and stability, AWVR pointing, and beam separation. In the
ASD domain, the criterion used for Cassini radio science experiments, the mean residual errors produced
by the system-diﬀerenced measurements fall well below (within range of) the Cassini GWE requirement
at all time scales >1000 seconds. The MCS performance does not depend on the absolute or ﬂuctuation
level of the tropospheric wet delay, but does diminish for moderate to heavy cloud conditions.
The indicated MCS performance is clearly superior to the results of earlier validation tests in which
the system was used to calibrate site-diﬀerenced, line-of-sight delays measured with a radio interferometer
over a 21-km baseline at Goldstone [13–15]. The consensus from the earlier experiments was that the
comparison tests were limited by unknown errors in the radio interferometry measurements. The current
results, in which MCS precision is evaluated by the redundant system comparisons, represent the upper
bound of performance (lower-bound error) in that common mode errors (modeling and algorithm) are
cancelled by the system-diﬀerenced calculation. However, an earlier design study [8] demonstrated that
these errors likely will be small relative to the system errors (calibration stability, pointing accuracy),
15

suggesting that the current optimized performance described in this article is a fair evaluation of the
MCS capability.
The extraordinary stability and elevation-pointing precision of the MCS AWVRs clearly are demonstrated in the measurements of path-delay variations over multi-hour to multi-day time scales. The
system-diﬀerenced measurements indicate that the 1- to 5-cm zenith wet-delay variations typical at Goldstone over time scales of days to weeks can be corrected by the MCS to precisions better than 0.06 cm.
The surface pressure sensors of the MCS have demonstrated stability suﬃcient to produce better than
0.01-cm precision in the calibration of dry-delay variations over time scales of weeks. These results suggest
that the Goldstone MCS provides a correction for greater than 95 percent of the troposphere-induced,
line-of-sight propagation “noise” over minute to multi-week time scales, enabling a wide range of radio
science and radio astronomy experiments.

Acknowledgments
We thank Elias Barbinis for his careful handling of the MCS data post-processing
following the Cassini radio science experiments and J. W. Armstrong for his interest
in the long-term delay statistics and for contributing Figs. 10 and 11. We also are
grateful to the operations crew at Goldstone for all of their invaluable assistance
in the deployment and maintenance of the MCS system at DSS 25. We also thank
Charles Naudet for many useful comments and suggestions in his review of the
manuscript.

References
[1] H. T. Howard, V. R. Eshleman, D. P. Hinson, A. J. Kliore, G. F. Lindal, R. Woo,
M. K. Bird, H. Volland, P. Edenhofer, M. Patzold, and H. Porsche, “Galileo Radio
Science Investigations,” Space Sci. Rev., vol. 60, pp. 565–590, 1992.
[2] G. L. Tyler, G. Balmino, D. P. Hinson, W. L. Sjogren, D. E. Smith, R. Woo,
S. W. Asmar, M. J. Connally, C. L. Hamilton, and R. A. Simpson, “Radio Science
Investigations with Mars Observer,” JGR, vol. 97, pp. 7759–7779, 1992.
[3] S. W. Asmar and N. Renzetti, The Deep Space Network as an Instrument for
Radio Science Research, JPL Publication 80-93 (Rev. 1), Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 1993.
[4] A. Kliore, J. D. Anderson, J. W. Armstrong, S. W. Asmar, C. L. Hamilton,
N. J. Rappaport, H. D. Wahlquist, R. Ambrosini, B. Bertotti, F. M. Flasar,
R. G. French, L. Iess, E. A. Marouf, and A. F. Nagy, “Cassini Radio Science
Investigations,” Space Sci. Rev. (in press), 2004.
[5] J. W. Armstrong, L. Iess, B. Bertotti, and P. Tortora, “Gravitational Wave
Background: Upper Limits in the 10−6 to 10−3 Hz Band,” ApJ, vol. 599, pp. 806–
813, 2003.
[6] B. Bertotti, L. Iess, and P. Tortora, “A Test of General Relativity Using Radio
Links with the Cassini Spacecraft,” Nature, vol. 425, no. 6956, pp. 374–376, 2003.
16

[7] A. B. Tanner, “Development of a High-Stability Water Vapor Radiometer,” Radio Science, vol. 33, pp. 449–462, 1998.
[8] S. J. Keihm and K. A. Marsh, “Advanced Algorithm and System Development for
Cassini Radio Science Tropospheric Calibration,” The Telecommunications and
Data Acquisition Progress Report 42-127, July–September 1996, Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, Pasadena, California, pp. 1–20, November 15, 1996.
http://tmo.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress report/42-127/127A.pdf
[9] D. W. Allan, “Statistics of Atomic Frequency Standards,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 54,
no. 2, pp. 221–230, February 1966.
[10] G. Elgered, “Tropospheric Radio Path Delay from Ground-Based Microwave
Radiometry,” in Atmospheric Remote Sensing by Microwave Radiometry, M. A.
Janssen, Ed., New York: Wiley, 1993.
[11] M. Tinto and J. W. Armstrong, “Spacecraft Doppler Tracking as a NarrowBand Detector of Gravitational Radiation,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 58, no. 042002,
pp. 042002-1–042002-8, 1998.
[12] S. J. Keihm, “Water Vapor Radiometer Measurements of the Tropospheric Delay
Fluctuations at Goldstone Over a Full Year,” The Telecommunications and Data
Acquisition Progress Report 42-122, April–June 1995, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Pasadena, California, pp. 1–11, August 15, 1995.
http://tmo.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress report/42-122/122J.pdf
[13] C. Naudet, C. Jacobs, S. Keihm, G. Lanyi, R. Linﬁeld, G. Resch, L. Riley,
H. Rosenberger, and A. Tanner, “The Media Calibration System for Cassini Radio Science: Part I,” The Telecommunications and Mission Operations Progress
Report 42-143, July–September 2000, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, pp. 1–8, November 15, 2000.
http://tmo.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress report/42-143/143I.pdf
[14] G. M. Resch, J. E. Clark, S. J. Keihm, G. E. Lanyi, C. J. Naudet, A. L. Riley, H. W. Rosenberger, and A. B. Tanner, “The Media Calibration System for
Cassini Radio Science: Part II,” The Telecommunications and Mission Operations Progress Report 42-145, January–March 2001, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Pasadena, California, pp. 1–20, May 15, 2001.
http://tmo.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress report/42-145/145J.pdf
[15] G. M. Resch, S. J. Keihm, G. E. Lanyi, R. P. Linﬁeld, C. J. Naudet, A. L. Riley, H. W. Rosenberger, and A. B. Tanner, “The Media Calibration System for
Cassini Radio Science: Part III,” The Interplanetary Network Progress Report
42-148, October–December 2001, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, pp. 1–12, February 15, 2002.
http://ipnpr.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress report/42-148/148H.pdf

17

