Coherent Reference Generator Phase Stability
V. N. Karwar
Communications Systems Research Section

The extent of phase noise introduced by the coherent reference generator (CRG) unit
in the DSN's Frequency and Timing Subsystem (FTS) has not so far been measured or
analyzed. This report calculates approximate phase stability estimates for the CRG. The
method used involves estimating the phase noise introduced by CRG components based
upon measurements made in the past on similar components in other parts of the FTS
and obtaining the CRG phase noise from the component phase noises.
Three estimates of phase stability are calculated - the fractional frequency change for
a 5°C step in temperature. the phase noise spectral density and the Allan standard
deviation. It is found from these estimates that the CRG phase stability is better than that
of the H-maser physics unit + receiver, which has been measured in the past. Thus, the
first step in improving FTS phase stability would be to make improvements in the
H-maser physics unit + receiver. These results are corroborated by indirect clock stability
estimates calculated from Doppler data by R. W. Hellings.

I. Introduction
The DSN's Frequency and Timing Subsystem (FTS) may be
divided into three separate subsystems - the primary frequency unit called the physics unit (such as H-maser or Cs
standard), the receiver, and the coherent reference generator
(CRG). The first two of these together, i.e., the physics unit +
receiver, will be referred to as the H-maser system or the Cs
system as appropriate. All three subsystems taken together will
be referred to as the H or the Cs clock. The receiver that goes
with the H-maser system is different from the one that goes
with the Cs system. However, the same CRG is used in the
DSN, no matter whether the H-maser or the Cs system is used.
222

So far, measurements of phase noise have been made on the
Cs system and on the H-maser system, but none on the CRG
(or on the receiver portion alone for either the H-maser or the
Cs system). In order to improve the frequency stability of the
FTS, it is necessary to identify the prime sources of phase/
frequency instability in the FTS. To do this, the first step is to
estimate the phase errors of the three subsystems separately,
so that improvement can first be made in the poorest of the
three subsystems.
This report describes an attempt to estimate the phase
instability introduced by the CRG alone and identifies areas
needing further work. While the CRG phase noise estimates

given here are very approximate, they do provide a starting
point for better estimates.

II. eRG D(escription
The CRG consists of the circuitry needed to synthesize and
distribute signals of frequencies 0.1, 1, 5, 10, 10.1, 45, 50,
55 MHz. The eRG inputs are signals offrequencies 0.1, 5 and
10 MHz, derived from the primary frequency unit + receiver.
A block diagram of the CRG is given in Fig. 1 (Fig. 2.1 of
Ref. 1).

Since temperature-induced phase drifts are not independent, the overall 1).1/1 introduced in a cascade of identical
components is just the sum of the individual D.fJfvalues. If the
components are of different types, the 1).1/f's may actually
tend to cancel each other; however, they are assumed to be
additive in making the estimates here. The S'" (10 Hz) values
are also summed, since they represent noise powers that are
uncorrelated. The a y (1 s) values are proportional to (S",
(10 Hz))1/2, so that the overall a y (1 s) is obtained as the
root-sum-square (rss) value of the individual a y (1 s) values.

IV. Sources of Phase Noise
III. Phase Noise Measures
Three measures of phase noise have been calculated here
(wherever possible). They are:

(1) D.I/f, the fractional frequency variation for a 5°C temperature step. The box in which the CRG is located is
assumed to have a response time of T = 2000 s. Phase
drifts (1).4» with temperature are often measured or
specified. From these, 1).1/1 can be calculated as

1).1 = 2 X 1).4> X _I_
I

3

T

21r/o'

(1)

where 1).4> is in radians, 10 is the nominal frequency,
and T ::: 2000 s.
(2) S'" (10 Hz), the one-sided spectral density of phase
noise S",(/) evaluated at I = 10 Hz. In all cases considered here, the noise is assumed to be flicker of phase;
i.e.,
(2)
so that specifying S'" (10 Hz) is sufficient to specify the
whole ,~¢(f) curve. This asumption is justified by measurement for multipliers (Ref. 2) and distribution
amplifiers (Ref. 3).
(3) a/I s), the Allan standard deviation a/r) evaluated
for r =: 1 s. This is calculated from S",(f) , by using the
expression given in Ref. 4 and corrected in Ref. 5.
After expressing the constant in Sil) in terms of S'"
(10 Hz), this gives

There are several components in the coherent reference
generator (CRG), each potentially a noise source. Unless otherwise stated, "noise" will mean "phase noise" throughout.
There are no frequency or phase control loops involving voltage controlled oscillators (YCOs) in the CRG, so that one of
the largest of the usual sources of noise is not present in the
CRG, as it is in the receiver. However, there are various
components, each of which introduces small amounts of noise.
In roughly descending order of phase noise introduced, they
are: tuned amplifiers and crystal filters, distribution amplifiers,
power splitters, mixers and multipliers.
YCOs are noisy because they convert voltage noise, from
whatever source present at their inputs, into phase noise. The
other components do not have such an I/O property and hence
are less noisy.
Tuned amplifiers and crystal filters mainly introduce phase
drifts with temperature changes. This is because their transfer
functions (both amplitude and phase) are narrowband around
a center frequency that changes with temperature as the (L, C)
component values defining this center frequency change with
temperature. This is especially true with crystal filters.
Distribution amplifiers (DA) usually introduce noise
because of the driver amplifiers preceding and/or following the
power divider/splitter present in the DA. All driver amplifiers
now used in the coherent reference generator (CRG) are
Class A amplifiers operating in the linear region of their characteristics, which are much less noisy than Class C amplifiers.
Power splitting is usually accomplished by transformers
with the proper turns ratios - these usually introduce negligible phase noise.

a (r) = 2.42 (S (10 HZ))1/2 (1 + 0.13 In r)I/2 (3)
y

101'

'"

where 10 is the nominal frequency, and r is the observation interval for calculating Allan standard deviation.

V. Direct Method for Estimating Phase Noise
The amounts of phase noise introduced by various components in the CRG are difficult to estimate correctly, because
223

phase noise measurements on most of these components have
not been made, nor is any analysis available. Inquiries with the
manufacturers of several of the components (crystals, crystal
filters, multipliers) also did not produce any results, except in
the case of one multiplier.
The calculations of CRG phase noise described here are
obtained by including noise estimates for only those of the
components that have some sort of estimate/measurement
available, and assuming that all others are zero, so that an
estimate of lower bound on the CRG phase noise can be
obtained. Even these lower bounds should not be taken as
rigid, because the phase noise for many of the components has
not been measured for the specific models used. in the CRG,
but extrapolated from measurements on similar components in
other subsystems (such as in the maser receiver).

with one or two stages; so ARI is probably a little worse than
AR2. On the other hand, ARI has feedback that would reduce
the noise to some extent, so that on the whole, ARI may be
assumed to be about as noisy as AR2.
Then the coherent reference generator (CRG) distribution
amplifier noise is estimated as the noise introduced by two
driver amplifiers like AR2 cascaded together, according to the
rules for cascading given in Section III.
3. Frequency multipliers. There are two (frequency)multipliers used in the CRG. The first is a X2 multiplier, which is a
harmonic generator, followed by a tuned amplifier. However,
as can be seen in Fig. 1, this X2 multiplier is used only as a
backup in generating a lO-MHz signal from a 5-MHz input.
What is primarily used is an independent lO-MHz input. For
this reason the effects of this multiplier and tuned amplifier
(on which no data are available) are not important.

A. The Components
1. Tuned amplifiers and crystal filters. Unfortunately,
there are no data available on these components, not even with
the manufacturers. These are important sources of phase drift
with temperature, but if the temperature is controlled, the
phase noise they introduce may be small. However, the coherent reference generator (CRG) is not typically operated in a
temperature-controlled environment.
Tuned amplifiers/crystal filters are used only in generating
the 10. I-MHz, 45-MHz and 55-MHz outputs, but not the other
outputs. Thus the phase noise for these outputs will be higher
than the numerical estimates given here, which don't take the
tuned amplifiers and crystal filters into account.
2. Distribution amplifiers. Phase noise estimates for the
CRG distribution amplifiers (DAs) are calculated from phase
drift and Sq, (10-Hz) measurements made for DAs used in the
H-maser reciever. The DAs in the H-maser receiver consist of
an noway (usually 12-way) power splitter, where each of the n
output ports is followed by a driver amplifier (labeled AR2
through AR(n + I». The distribution amplifiers in the CRG,
on the other hand (see Fig. 2), consist of an input driver
amplifier (ARI) followed by the power splitter and driver
amplifiers structure used in the receiver DAs.
The input driver amplifier ARI is different in design from
the output driver amplifiers typified by AR2. It is assumed
here that the measured distribution amplifier noise in the
receiver (Refs. 3, 6) comes entirely from the output driver
amplifiers such as AR2; this neglects the power splitter noise,
which is reasonable as stated in Section 4. It is then assumed
that ARI has the same noise as AR2. This may not be
accurate, since ARI is an OP AMP (operational amplifier) with
many stages of amplification, while AR2 is a hybrid amplifier
224

The second multiplier used is a X 10 multiplier from Zeta
Laboratories. This is a chain-type multiplier; i.e., it uses a
chain of harmonic generators, filters and mixers to get the
desired multiplication. The !::J.f/f for a 5°C step in temperature
for this multiplier was estimated from Eq. (1) by using !::J.¢
data supplied by Zeta Laboratories. The Sq, (10 Hz) and the a y
(1 s) for the multiplier were estimated based on measured Sq,
(10 Hz) data (Refs. 2, 7) for a JPL-built multiplier which had a
somewhat similar design (Le., it was a chain-type multiplier, as
opposed to a step-recovery diode or phase-locked loop type).
The JPL multiplier was a X14 multiplier, and appropriately
scaled-down values were used to estimate the noise on the X10
multiplier used here.

B. Phase Noises for Coherent Reference
Generator (CRG) Outputs
Using the phase noise data for individual components
described in Section V-A, the phase noises for the various CRG
outputs can be estimated as follows:

1. The 0.1, 1, 5, 10 MHz outputs. For these outputs, the
only significant contributions to phase noise are from an input
driver (Dj) and a distribution amplifier (DA) - there are no
mixers or multipliers or filters used in generating these outputs. As an example, consider the O.I-MHz output. In the
block diagram (Fig. 1), the input driver D j is labeled
9455393-1. The distribution amplifier (DA) is A4A2 or A4A3.
Detailed block diagrams of A4A2 and A4A3 show a DA like
the one in Fig. 2. Thus the phase noise for this group of CRG
outputs is given in Table 1. For uniformity, all data given are
referenced to a 100-MHz output; Le., the phase noise spectral
density is what would be present if the outputs were multiplied in frequency, by a perfect multiplier, to 100 MHz.

2. Other outputs. All the other CRG outputs have a minimum phase noise given by Table 1, because they all include a
DA and an input driver. However, the 10.1-, 45- and 55-MHz
outputs will have a larger noise because they all include crystal
filters - this is because the 1O.I-MHz signal is obtained by
mixing the 10- and O.I-MHz inputs, while the 45- and 55-MHz
signals are obtained by mixing 50-MHz and 5-MHz inputs, and
the mixed outputs are filtered by a crystal in the 1O.1-MHz
case and a crystal filter in the 45-MHz and 55-MHz cases. No
estimates are available for the extent of noise introduced by
the filtering.
The 45-, 50- and 55-MHz signals will have, in addition to
the noise in Table 1, a component due to the X 10 multiplier
used in generating the 50-MHz signal from a 5-MHz input. The
phase estimates for this multiplier are given in Table 2. Thus,
we get Table 3 for the 10.1-, 45-, 50-, and 55-MHz CRG
outputs.

VI. Indirect Estimates of Coherent Reference
Generator (CI=lG) Noise
A. Very LOlng Baseline Interferometer
(VLBI) Experiments

Some groups performing VLBI experiments have noticed
that on days when the ICs clock is used by the DSN, the phase
data taken in the VLBI measurements are worse than when the
H-maser clock is used. This would indicate that, since the same
CRG is used in both cases, (with only the Cs phYSics unit +
receiver being replaced by the H-maser physics unit + receiver),
then the CRG stability is at least about as good as the worst of
the two - the Cs system and the H-maser system. These results
from the VLBI experiments are not very quantitative or very
reliable, since the purpose of the experiments was not to
estimate the noise on the primary standard and, in fact, the
experimenters were not always aware of what frequency standard was in use on a particular day. Controlled VLBI experiments, with the same (celestial) source being observed on two
successive days, with the Cs clock used on one day and the
H-maser clock on the other day, could perhaps be useful. Such
experiments would help in getting an indirect estimate of CRG
stability.
B. Doppler Tracking Calculations

R. W. Hellings (Ref. 8) made calculations with Doppler
tracking data from Voyager (1979) and Viking (1977) that
enable estimation of the primary standard phase noise. In
1977, the Cs clock was used, while in 1979, the H-maser clock
was used. Hellings was able to infer the phase on the clock by
the following method:

In two-way tracking of spacecraft, the ground clock (frequency standard) controls the transmitter frequency v as well
as providing the reference for measuring the Doppler shift Av
on the return signal. In normal DSN operation, the received
signal is tracked in a phase-locked loop, the clock being used
to beat the received frequency down to the Doppler tone. If
there is a fluctuation 8v =q(t) in the frequency produced by
the clock, then since the fluctuation is also present on the
return signal a round-trip light time (RTLT) later, the Doppler
record has a noise term given by

yet) • -q(t) + q It - (

~o )

I

where r 0 is the distance between the transmitter and the
spacecraft.
It can be seen that auto correlating the Doppler tone (after
subtracting the predicted Doppler) will give rise to a negative
peak in the autocorrelation function (acf) at t =2r ole having
half the magnitude of the peak occurring at t = O.

Other noises like white phase system noise will not produce
this second peak, because this noise is present only on the
return signal. Other noises like plasma and tropospheric noise
have a spectrum that is quite different from the flicker of
phase or frequency that is characteristic of clock noise, and
hence the autocorrelation function is quite different. Details
of spectra are given in Ref. 11. Thus, the clock noise can be
identified and measured.
In obtaining both the 1977 and the 1979 data, the DSN
64-m-diameter antennas and S-band transmission frequencies
were used. The S-band frequency for the 64-m subnetwork is
derived from the 50-MHz CRG output by a multiplication by
48 in a Dana synthesizer. There have been no major changes in
the multiplier or the wherent reference generator (CRG)
between 1977 and 1979. Thus the difference between the
clock noise results of Hellings in 1977 and 1979 shows the
difference between the 50-MHz output obtained from the Cs
standard + CRG system and the H-maser + CRG system. From
the 1977 data, the clock phase noise as measured by its
standard deviation was determined to be 10- 13 ; from the
1979 data, the clock phase noise was determined to be below
the instrument sensitivity, i.e., < 3 X 10- 14 • This order-ofmagnitude difference is about the same as the ratio of phase
stability of the H-maser + receiver to the phase stability of the
Cs standard + receiver, as determined by previous measurements. This supports the idea that the CRG phase stability is
at least about as good as the stability of the Cs standard +
receiver.
225

VII. Conclusions

VIII. Suggested Areas of Investigation

The CRG phase noise has been estimated based on data
about components similar to the CRG components. The phase
noise calculations given here, taken together with the measured data (Refs. 9, 10) for the H-maser + receiver, of

A. Direct Measurements

iJ.f !
f soc step'

5 X 10- 13 ,S</> (10 Hz) = -98 dB,

a (1 s) = 3 X 10- 13
y

show that the coherent reference generator (CRG) phase stability, at least for the 0.1-, 1-, 5-, 10-, 50-MHz outputs, is
better than that of the H-maser + receiver system.
The phase noise on the other CRG outputs (10.1, 45,
55 MHz) is expected to be higher, but by an unknown
amount, because of crystal filter instabilities that are
unknown.
The calculated results for the 50-MHz output corroborate
the results that have been obtained indirectly by Hellings from
Doppler data.
However, all the estimates here are tentative, because they
are based on measurements not made directly on CRG components. The inferences of CRG noise from Hellings' calculations
may also be incorrect, because the data were taken in 1977 for
the Cs-based clock and in 1979 for the H-maser based clock,
and many FTS components may have been changed during the
period between the two measurements, although this does not
appear to be the case.

226

No measurements have been made either on the CRG as a
whole or on most of its components. The best way to find the
CRG stability would be to make direct measurements on it.
The equipment needed to make this kind of measurement is
not yet available but is soon expected to be.
Alternately, the phase noises of individual CRG components can be measured, as has been done for some of the
H-maser receiver components. In particular, the crystals and
crystal filters used in the CRG should be measured for phase
stability, since no estimates for these are available, and they
are expected to be important noise sources in the CRG. The
overall CRG stability can be calculated once the individual
component stabilities are correctly known.
B. Indirect Measurements
It would be worthwhile to set up a VLBI experiment
specifically for the purpose of measuring the relative stability
of the Cs and H-based clocks. This would be useful if a direct
estimate of CRG noise cannot be made.

This kind of experiment would require using the two standards separately for observing the same celestial source. The
two sets of measurements would have to be made within a
short period of each other, so as to minimize errors due to
different paths to the source. Intermediate phase data, not
normally preserved in VLBI experiments, may need to be kept
in order to compare clock stabilities.
The direct method of CRG stability estimation would be
preferable because there are too many variables, especially
atmospheric effects on phase, that cannot be correctly
accounted for in VLBI experiments.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Roger Meyer for his many helpful discussions and
suggestions throughout; the discussions with Paul Kuhnle, Ronald Hellings and George
Madrid are also gratefully acknowledged.

References
1. Coherent Reference Generator Technical Manual, TM 509236, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., February 1976. (an internal document).
2. Lutes, G., et al. "Hydrogen Maser: Low Phase Noise, L-Band Frequency Multiplier,"
TR 32-1526, Vol. VII, pp. 81-83, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.,
February 1972.
3. Meyer, R., and Sward, A., "Frequency Generation and Control: The Measurement of
Phase Jitter," DSN Space Programs Summary 37-64, Vol. II, pp. 55-64, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., August 1970.
4. Barnes, J. A., et aI., "Characteristics of Frequency Stability," NBS Technical Note
