Global PositioningSystemTimingReceiversin the DSN
P.A.Clements
Communications

Systems Research Section

The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a worldwide navigation system using a constellation of earth satellites with onboard clocks. The GPS is also usableto transfer time
and frequency. JPL has provided part of thefunding to the National Bureau of Standards
{NBS) to build GPS timing receivers.Preliminary tests with the breadboardreceiver at
NBS has produced remarkable precision in time and frequency transfer between the
United States Naval Observatory (USNO) and NBS. JPL plans to install receivers in the
DSN to demonstrate their ability to transfer time and frequency within the DSN and
between the DSN and outside agencies.

I, Introduction
JPL is procuring two GlobalPositioning System(GPS) satellite timing receivers from the National Bureau of Standards
(NBS). JPL has funded a large part of the development of the
receiver designat NBS. The GPS timingreceiversare to be evaluated for use in the DSN as a method of time and frequency
transfer among the stations of the DSN, and between the DSN
and world time and frequency standards.

space vehicle (SV) is information on its position with respect
to art Earth-based rectilinear coordinate system. If this time
and position data were transmitted to an Earth-based station
with its own dock, then the difference in time, neglecting
relativistic effects, would be the propagation delay of the
signal. Hence the observer can determine his position as being
somewhere on a sphere which has its center at the spacecraft.
By viewing three SVs and by having a reasonably good dock,
an observer can determine his position exactly. By viewing

JPL plans to demonstrate the use of a GPS timing receiver
system as a method of significantlyreducing the cost of meeting
the functional requirements for time and frequency transfer.

four
clock.SVs, the observer can determine his position using a poor

II. The Global Positioning System

The SVs are distributed in three orbital planes inclined 63°
with respect to the Earth's equatorial plane, and offset from
each other by 120° longitude. Each SV is in 12-hour prograde
orbit. This distribution is meant to maximize the number of
SVsvisible to an observer anywhere on the earth at any time.

The GPS is a Department of Defense worldwide navigation
system that uses a constellation of orbiting Earth satellites,
each of which carries an onboard clock (Ref. 1). Stored on each
90

The GPS satellite configuration calls for 24 SVs.This number has been reduced to 18 due to budgetary considerations.

The GPS SV signal is at two frequencies: link 1 at 1575.42
MHz and link 2 at 1227.6 MHz. These frequencies are multipies of 10.23 MHz,namely:

replicated code is shifted (delayed) until a correlation is
found. With correlation, the receiver locks to the code with
the delay lock loop and to the signal with a phase lock loop.

link 1 = 1575.42 MHz = 10.23 MHz X 154
link 2 = 1227.6MHz = 10.23MHz × 120.
This is a particularly good frequency region for a couple of
reasons. First, there is little use at these frequencies, so it is
relatively easy to obtain an allocation. Second, the effects of
the ionosphere on the propagation delay are smaller than at
lower frequencies,
The GPS SV transmits two PN codes on link 1; they are
named the P code and the C/A code. The GPS timing receiver
uses only the C/A code. The C/A code is 1023 bits long and
is transmitted at a 1023-Mbpsrate; hence its duration is 1 ms.
Each SV's code is unique so that all the SVs can use the same
RF carrier frequency and yet a receiver can pick out a particular SV's signal. The data are transmitted at a 50-bps rate, so
there are 20 C/A code sequences for each data bit. The data
consist of 4 blocks. Data Block 1 contains the clock corrections for the SV clock with respect to GPS time. Data Block 2
contains ephemeris information for that particular SV. There
is a message block that contains any messagesthat might be
needed. Finally Data Block 3 contains an almanac of the locations of all of the SVs in the GPS constellation. The complete
message takes 6 seconds to transmit,

iV.

Timingand FrequencyTransfer

A. Synchronization
One fundamental aspect of time is that of simultaneity. 1 A
definition given by NBS for simultaneity is: "Two events are
simultaneous if equivalent signals,propagating in agivenmedia,
arrive coincidentally at a common point in space which is
geometrically an equal distance from the source of each
event. In practice a much broader definition is often used for
clock synchronization; i.e., two docks have the same reading
in a specificreference frame" (Ref. 2).
If two clocks are beating simultaneously, in a specific reference frame, they are said to be synchronized. All of us have
synchronized one clock to another by setting our wristwatch
to the mantel dock. We make the time reading (date) of one
clock agreewith the date of another dock.
If docks are located some distance from one another, the
problems of accurate synchronization become difficult. Of
course we use radios and telephones to get the date, but these
methods are not usable to transfer the date with an accuracy
of microseconds or nanoseconds.
Early in the 17th century Galileo deviseda method of date

III. Description of the Receiver
The NBS GPS timing receiver system consists of three
chassis which are rack-mountable and a separate low-noise
amplifier and down-converter which are mounted at the
antenna. The rack-mountable chassis take a combined vertical
rack space of about 18 inches, a keyboard which takes about
4 inches more and a printer which takes about 6 inches.
A 100-MHzlocal oscillator frequency is sent to the antennamounted down-converter. This signal is subsequently multiplied (X15) and mixed with a 1.57542 GHz out of the wide
band front end amplifier to produce a 75.42 MHzIF frequency,
The balance of the receiveris what is known as a Tau Dither
Delay Lock Receiver (Ref. 1). The receiverhas two loops. The
inner loop is a delay lock loop. Its function is to lock to the
incoming PN code, thereby producing a signal the outer phase
lock loop can lock to.
The receiver must perform a cross correlation operation to
extract a signal from a particular SV. To do this, the PN code
of the particular SV is replicated in the receiver. Then the

transfer using observations of the moons of Jupiter. TheJovian
satellite system is a clock that is observablefrom any place on
the Earth. All one needed was an ephemeris table and a reasonable telescope and he could synchronize any clock on Earth.
This is an application of the first defmition of simultaneity.
Note that every place on Earth is approximately the same distance to Jupiter. This technique was used extensively for over
100 years for map-making;however, it was not usable on ships
at sea because of the difficulty of looking through a telescope
from a pitching deck.
With good portable cesium docks the defmition of syrtchronization of widely separated clocks is a "clock trip" from
one clock to the other, then back to the first dock. This is
called a clock closure. This method invokesthe second def'mition of synchronization. The most careful clock trips take into
account the path of the travelingclock to correct for relativistic
effects and refer the docks to the same reference frame

lThere are threeaspectsof time:timeinterval,date (theclockreading),
and simultaneity.

91

(Ref. 3). This is one of the methods presently used in the
DSN.2
Over the last several years people have been getting back to
Galileo's method of using satellites for time transfer. For
example NBS has been using the GOES weather satellites for
time transfer. The DSN has used a technique of bouncing
timing pulses off the Moon. Now both NBS and the United
States Naval Observatory (USNO) are using the GPS satellites
for time transfer,
The GPS can be used in several Waysto accurately transfer
time between two or more known locations on the Earth. I
shall describe two methods which are planned during the JPL/
NBS demonstration.
The first of these two methods is a simultaneous common

The second method is to make successiveobservations of
the same SV clock (sequential view). The first observer synchronizeshis clock with the SV clock when the SV is at a good
viewing angle. A second observer then synchronizes his clock
to the same SV at some time which is less than 12 hours later
than the first observation, and when the SV is at a good viewing angle for him. If the SV that is observedhas a cesiumdock,
then the date uncertainty will be about 5 ns over a 12-hour
period. The ephemeris errors will tend to cancel because the
same SV is used.
As in the case of portable clock trips, the relativisitic effect
needs to be taken into account for a precision time transfer
(Ref. 3).
B. Syntonization

view (mutual view) of a single GPS satellite. With this technique the common mode ephemeris errors cancel,and the satellite clock error contributes nothing. If the two or more docks
are within 3000 km of each other so that the observation angles
are high, one can expect a measurement accuracy of 10 nanoseconds time difference between the observers' clocks. If the
propagation and ephemeris errors can be reduced, the accuracy
can be reduced to 1 nanosecond,

Closely related to synchronization is the concept ofsyntonization. Syntonization is the act of putting two oscillators on
the same frequency (tone). It is a musical term and is found in
some dictionaries so defined. The term syntonization accuracy
refers to a number (f- fo)]fo = A.f/f, which is a measure of
how close the frequency of one oscillator is to that of another,
where fo is the frequency of the reference oscillator and f is
the frequency of the measured oscillator.

The specific procedure for a mutual view observation is
quite simple. The observersagree to observea givensatellite at
a given time. Alernatively, if an observer knows another's
observation schedule, he only has to make his schedule agree
with the other's. The data of a complete observation of a satellite would include the date of the observation to the second
and the time offset from the observer's clock to the GPS
dock. At some time later the observers can exchange data.

As presently conceived, the operation of the GPS receiver
would be used to take a reading of time offset once a day
between two docks. If clock A's oscillator is running fast
with respect to clock B's oscillator, then clock A's value of
date will advance with respect to clock B's value of date.
Therefore, by taking daily clock offset readings one can determine the difference in rates between the two docks oscillators,
givenAf/f.

Ideally an observatory's daily observation schedule would
be on sidereal time.3 This would mean that the SV would
appear in the same position in the sky every day at observation time. The advantage of this method is the elimination of
variables associated with direction. As the two docks are separated, the angles of mutual viewof the satellites become more
shallow. As this happens, the ephemeris and propagation errors
become larger, so the measuring accuracy is decreased,

2In addition to clock closures, VLBI methods are now being used
between the DSN stations. In Spain the Loran-C navigation system is
used
in Australia television synchronization signals are used to
transferandtime.
3Sidereal time is the time used by astronomers. It uses observations on
the fixed stars rather than the Sun. A sidereal day is about 4 minutes
shorter than a mean solarday;hencethe timeof observationwould

advanceabout4 minutesperdaymeansolartime.
92

V. Present

Performance

of the Receivers

At present NBS and USNO are conducting daily mutual
view observations of SVs, This means that NBS acquires and
receives data from the same SV at the same time USNO is
doing so. NBS is using a breadboard version of a receiver of
NBS design. USNOis using a receiverpurchased from Stanford
Telecommunications Incorporated (STI).
USNO observes five SVs daily. The offsets between GPS
time and USNO Master Clock (MC) are published
USNO Bulletin (Fig. 1). In addition, the data

weekly in a

are available
daily by telephone using a MODEM and a terminal. The data
consist of the offset in nanoseconds between GPS time calculated by each satellite and the time of the MC. Also the data
includes the date to the second that the data were taken.

The USNO measures the offset between GPS time and MC.
The MC is the physical realization of UTC (USNO)4 and is
designated UTC (USNO, MC). Because of the present method
of steering the MC, the time scale UTC (USNO, MC) differs
from UTC (USNO) by some small amount (several nanosecends). This offset is availableon the telephone on a daily basis
in the same way as the GPS data.
NBS observes four SVs daily, scheduled so that it has a
mutual view of USNO. The SVs are SV-5 and SV-9, which
have cesium clocks on board, and SV-6 and SV-8 which have
rubidium clocks. NBS measures the offset between GPS time
by each SV and NBSclock 9 [(UTC(NBS, CL9))].
In the same way, UTC (USNO, MC) has some offset from
UTC (USNO), UTC (NBS, C19) as some small offset from
UTC (NBS). These data are not published but are available
from NBS.
There is a bit of a scheduling problem in the mutual view
exercise between NBS and USNO. The NBS receiver corrects
its viewing time 4 minutes a day to make up the difference
between mean solar time and siderealtime. The USNOreceiver
on the other hand is corrected 28 minutes once a week. This
means there is a slight departure from sidereal time as the
week wears on. I understand that USNOwill eventually operate
the receiver on sidereal time. At the present NBShas to change
the schedule every day.
The big advantage of viewing the SV on a sidereal schedule
is that it will appear in the same position in the sky every day.
This is important if there are any multipath problems and with
respect to syntonization. To measure frequency offset, the
important thing is change in time. If we look at the SV in the
same place in the sky every day, a lot of variables cancel.
Present measurements between USNOand NBShave shown
that the short-term characteristics of the GPSsignal have white
noise phase modulation (white PM) as a limiting noise process,
The method of determining this was a new technique called
the Modified Allan Variance (mod a2y(r)). Mod o2y(r) as its
name implies is a modification of the traditional method of
characterizing frequency stability, the Allan Variance. Using
mod tr2(r), one can easily distinguish between white PM and
flicker phase noise (Flicker PM). Flicker PM is a type of power
spectral density which is inverselyproportional to the spectral
frequency _o/2rr.If Flicker PM noise is present then there is a

logarithmic divergenceof the standard deviationwhichincreases
with the number of samples taken (Ref. 4). So it is important
to determine if this noise process is present.
Knowing the limiting noise process to be white PM, one can
safely proceed using the statistics of the normal distribution.
The results of this analysis have shown that one can measure
time differences to less than one nanosecond for averaging
times of 4 minutes (Ref. 5). The data from the two receivers
are being analyzed by both NBS and JPL. Results have been
published by NBS(Ref. 7). Figure2 is a graph of UTC(USNO) UTC (NBS) versus days. The graph coversabout a four-month
period. During this period several clock trips were made
between USNO and NBS. The agreement is shown on the
graph,s
The syntonization between the rates of UTC (USNO) and
UTC (NBS) can be measured using the GPS timing receivers.
If a set of time difference measurements are made using a
single SV, then a slope can be found of time difference versus
time, by finding a least square linear fit to the data. This
assumes that the noise causing the variations in readings is
white. This procedure is repeated for several SVs which produces a set of slopes (Fig. 3a,b,c,d). The slopes are a measure
in the difference in rates of the two docks as measured by
using different SVs.
A second assumption is now made; that is, the measures of
these slopes are independent. Next, the mean and standard
deviation and the standard deviation of the mean are found
for the set of slopes.
For the period 5 Sept 81 to 16 Sept 816 the slopes of
[UTC(USNO)] - [UTC(NBS)] by the severalSVs are:
by SV 5 -11.32 nanosec/day
by SV 9 -11.35 nanosec/day
by SV 6 -10.73 nanosec/day
by SV 8 -11.87 nanosec/day
The mean is

-11.07 nsec/day

The standard deviation is

-0.67 nsec/day

The standard deviation of the mean is -0.33 nsec/day

SThe measurement of the time offset via GPS has an offset of +445
nanosec with respect to the clock closure. The reason is unknown at
4UTC universal coordinated time. The new UTC was adopted by the
International Radio Consultive Committee (CCIR) in 1971 and put
into effect 1 Jan. 1972. In this system all clocks run at the same rate,
based on an atomic cesium clock,

this time; it is probably due to design differences in the USNO and
NBS receivers. The offset was removed from the GPS data.
6These dates are arbitrarily taken. The period happens to be a set of
continuous data. Other sets have produced better results.

93

The standard deviation of the mean is found by
SD -0.67

_

Goldstone-NBS experiment. The two receivers should give
-0.33 nsec/day

where SD is the standard deviation and N is the number of
degrees of freedom. Since it was assumed that the measurements via the different SVs were independent, this number
is 4, the number of SVs.
The value of 0.33 nanosecond per day corresponds to

0.33 × 10 -9 sec/day = -3.82 × 10-_5 A__£f
86,400 sec/day
f

which is a measure of syntonization.

Vl. The GPS Timing Receivers in the DSN
The GPS timing receivers will be deployed in the DSN in
several steps. The first step will be to establish time and irequency transfer between NBS and the Time Standard Ensemble
located at Goldstone. The final step will be to establish time
and frequency transfer throughout the DSN.
The first step of the demonstration will be to install the
two GPS receivers at the Goldstone clock ensemble at Goldstone. The receivers will be scheduled to perform mutual view
observationswith NBS and USNO.
This configuration and procedure will repeat the demonstration that is presently being performed between NBS and
USNO. There will be a receiver at each of these two clock
ensembles.The ensembles are located some distance from each
other but not so great a distance that the mutual viewing
angles are shallow. Finally there is a regular traveling clock trip
between these clock ensembles. This demonstration will not
only confirm the NBS-USNOexperiment, but it will establish
a time and frequency transfer between the DSN and NBS. The
immediate results of this configuration and procedure will be
to reduce the necessity of clock trips between the Goldstone
clock ensemble and NBS from every 120 days to once a year
or even less often. It is planned to permanently have one of
the receivers at the Goldstone clock ensemble. Therefore this
savingcan be continually realized.
Another saving will be realized when the Goldstone clock
ensemble is moved to DSS 14. This move is planned for sometime in 1983. The presence of a GPS receiver will greatly
help maintain time and frequency during the move.
94

The reason for placing two GPS receiversat the same place
is to check the receiversthemselves and act as a control for the
identical this
results
theirusantennas
in thethe
same
location. In
addition
willifgive
a chanceare
to check
receiverbefore
it is sent to another station in the DSN.

I plan to repeat the procedures that are now being done
between NBS and USNO. The difference is time and frequency
transfer from NBS to the Goldstone clockensemble rather than
USNO. In addition time comparisons will be made between
the two GPS receivers which are located next to one another
at the Goldstone clock ensemble. These measurements should
be identical except for any errors in the receiversthemselves.
Beyond repeating the NBS to USNOdemonstration and the
establishment of time and frequency transfer from NBS to the
Goldstone clock ensemble, an even more informative measurement will be available. If the NBS, USNO and the Goldstone
clock ensemble GPS receivers are all on the same schedule, for
mutual view, then a three-station measurement closure will be
available. This will be somewhat akin to the three baseline
VLBI closuresreported in Ref. 8 except that all of the stations
will be located in the continental U.S.
This will allow a simultaneous measurement of the time
offset [UTC (USNO)- UTC (DSN)], [UTC (USNO)- UTC
(NBS)] and [UTC (USNO) - UTC (DSN)]. There will be two
checks of the accuracy of time transfer using the GPSreceivers.
First the offsets [UTC (USNO) - UTC (NBS)] and [UTC
(NBS) - UTC (DSN)] are well-known and kept with traveling
clocks.7 Second, by the closure measurement it should be possible to get a measure of the absolute accuracy of the GPS
receiver system independent of clock trips.
The second step will be to move one of the GPS timing
receivers to DSS 63 in Spain. Spain was chosen as the second
installation because it is closer to Goldstone GTS than DSS 43
in Australia. The great circle distance between GTS andMadrid
is approximately 85° whereas the great circle distance between
Goldstone and Canberra is approximately 110°.
It is also possible to complete a closure of measurements
which includes DSS 63. USNO is approximately 55° great

"/All timeshavebeen subtractedfromUTC(USNO).Thiscorresponds
to using USNO as the Standard. This is done for convenience. JPL

traditionallyuses NBSas the Standardfor the DSNbecauseof its
proximity.

circle distance from Madrid. There will be mutual view measurements (once per day, it is hoped) among the four locations
USNO, NBS, Goldstone and DSS 63. This daily mutual view
might involve some low viewing angles from DSS 63 because
of nonconformance to USNO's schedule. Daily mutual or
sequential view between Goldstone and DSS63, which is
independent of outside agencies,is being planned,
There are plans by NBS to install a receiver in Paris, France,
at the Bureau International de l'Heure (BIH), sometime in
1982. Paris is only 10° great circle distance from Madrid;
therefore one could expect the same performance as between
USNO and NBS. This assumes a daily high angle observation
from BIH.
The third step will be to install a receiver at DSS 43. This
is the most difficult step because of the distance. The great
circle distance from GTS to DSS43 is approximately 110° and
from DSS 43 to DSS 63 approximately 160°. Mutual viewsat
these distances are right above the horizon;therefore aschedule
of sequential viewswill probably be the more useful. Because
JPL will have only two receiverswe are planningto use one of
NBS's receiversfor the DSS 43 demonstration.
An exciting experiment will be a three-station closure of
DSS 43, DSS 63 and GTS. The results of this will be compared to the VLBI three station closure in 1979 (Ref. 7).
The DSN receivers will be scheduled to make a three-station
closure every day if possible. Certainly we will make an offset measurement, [UTC (DSN) - UTC (DSS 43)] and [UTC
(DSN) - UTC(DSS 63)], every day.

VII, Conclusion
It is no mean task to determine the accuracy of time transfer over intercontinental distances using the GPS receivers.
Suppose a sequential view of a SV is taken by two receivers
anyplaceon the Earth. Furthermore,supposetheSVisequipped
with a cesium clock. Then time transfer accuracies of 10 nsec
to 50 nsec are anticipated (Ref. 8). This means for a threestation closure the expected error is x/3-times the individual
experiment error or, 17 - 86 nsec. By using multireceiver
closures, and repeating the short distance (<4000 km), transfers which were demonstrated in the continental U.S., the
accuracies can certainly be confirmed.
The obvious way to determine the accuracy of GPSreceiver
time transfer is to make an independent measurement using
established methods. Data on the regular clock closures give
errors of 300 nsec, which is too large to measure GPSreceiver
performance. A careful clock closure could yield an error of
35 nsec for a trip of<40 hours each way, with three such trips
2 months apart. Frequency could be measured with an error of
I X 10 -14 A.f/.f.
The other method of time transfer used in the DSNis VLBI.
Present VLB1 errors are approximately 100 nsec from DSS 14
to DSS63, and 200 nsec from DSS 14 to DSS 43. The DSS 43
to DSS 63 baseline measurement is not done often but the
accuracy of that baseline is approximately 300 nsec. Within
the next few months, there are plans to implement new techniques that are expected to decrease the errors from one to
two orders of magnitude (Refs. 9, 10). This would mean that
VLB1 could be used as an independent measurement of the
time offsets between the clocks in the DSN.

95

Acknowledgement
Appreciation is expressed for the technical assistance anddata provided by Mr.DavidW.
Allan and Mr. Dick D. Davisof the National Bureau of Standards.

References
I. Spilker, J. J., Digital Communication by Satellite, Thomas Kailath, editor, PrenticeHall Inc., Chapter 17, 18.
2. "Time and Frequency Theory and Fundamentals," NBS Monograph 140, National
Bureau of Standards, U.S. Department of Commerce, Byron E. Blair, editor, page
208.
3. Ashby, N., and Allan, D., "Practical Implication of Relativity for a Global Coordinate Time Scale,"Radio Science, Vol. 14, pp. 649-669, July-August 1979.
4. Allan, D. W., "Statistics of Atomic Frequency Standards," Proe. IEEE, Feb. 1966,
pp. 221-230.
5. Allan, D.W., and Barnes, J., "A Modified Allan Variance With Increased Oscillator
Decharacterization Ability," 35th Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Frequency Control, 1981.
6. Davis, D.D., et al., "Construction and Performance Characteristics of a Prototype
NBS/GPS Receiver," Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Frequency
Control, 1981.
7. Allan, D.W., and Weiss, M.A., "Accuracy Time and Frequency Transfer During
Common View of a GPS Satellite," Proceedings of the 34th Annual Frequency Control Symposium, 1980.
8. Cheetham, C. M., et al., "Demonstration of Remote Clock Monitoring by VLBI, With
Three Baseline Closures," in DSN ProgressReport 42-53, July-August 1979, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., Oct. 15, 1979.
9. Wilcher, J.H., "Block I Phase 1 Very Long Baseline Interferometry Implementation," in The Deep Space Network ProgressReport 42-58, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.,Aug. 15, 1980.
10. Wilcher, J. H., "Block 1 Phase 2 Very Long Baseline Interferometry Implementation," in The Tracking and Data Acquisition ProgressReport 42-66, Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., Dec. 15, 1981.

96

GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM(GPS)
VALUESPRESENTED
BELOWFORNAVSTARGPSSATELLITES
ARETHE RESULTOF A LINEAR FITTHROUGH
APPROXIMATELY100DATA POINTS, REFERRED
TO THE BEGINNING OF THETRACKING PERIOD(TIME
OF MEASUREMENT). SATELLITES
ARETRACKEDFORAPPROXIMATELYTEN MINUTES.

MJD
NOV.

NAVSTAR1
SV! 4

NAVSTAR3
SV# 6

NAVSTAR4
SV# 8

NAVSTAR5
SV# 5

NAVSTAR6
SV! 9

MC-GPS UT

MC-GPS UT

MC-GPS UT

MC-GPS UT

MC-GPS UT

9 44917*

,0449,B
4
980180 4
B9B1753301
-498 174224
4919153049190
301
11 44919
-49.697(180430) -49.805(175330) -49.811(174230) -49.798(191548)
-49.792(190430)
12 44920
13 44921

-49.705(180442)
-49.621(180448)

-49.743(175354)
-49.677(175330)

-49.755(174230)
-49.688(174230)

